There are three methods clinical trials can be run.
1) Placebo. In clinical trials that compare a new medicine or treatment with another that already exists.
Researchers will assign some participants to receive the new medicine that has its treatment value, and others will receive an inactive product called a placebo.
The purpose of a placebo is to compare whether the effects of the treatment differ between the placebo and treatment groups.
2) Randomization. It is the process by which treatments are assigned to two different groups.
This is done to avoid any bias in intentionally assigning specific participants to get one treatment or another.
Participants are randomly assigned to treatment groups without any influence from the research team.
The effects of each treatment are compared at specific points during a trial.
If one treatment is found to be more beneficial, the trial is stopped so that the participants receive the more beneficial treatment.
If the other treatment is found to be more beneficial, the participants undergo the same process to ensure all participants receive the appropriate treatment.
3) Blinded studies. There are two kinds of blinded studies: single-blind and double-blind.
In single-blind studies, when a pharmacist gives participants medication, participants are not told what they are given, while the research team knows.
In a double-blind study, neither the participants nor the research team are told what they are given; only the pharmacist knows.
In case of a medical emergency, the pharmacist will let the research team know which treatment participants are receiving so that they can adjust the treatment.